It is not easy viewing, but, for the "more than 40,000 high schools" and "hundreds of safety organizations and government agencies" where it will be shown, I suspect it will be effective. As Herzog says, "In one second, entire lives are either wiped out or changed forever."
His family belonged to the Missouri Synod Lutheran Church. When he was in the eighth grade, he discovered Charles Darwin, and was caught reading The Origin of Species in church. Later in life, he rejected religion.[5] Due to lack of money, he almost failed to attend college. His eldest brother interceded, and Hilleman graduated first in his class from Montana State University with family help and scholarships. He won a fellowship to the University of Chicago and received his doctoral degree in microbiology in 1941. His doctoral thesis was on chlamydia, which was then thought to be caused by a virus. Hilleman showed that the disease was in fact caused by an unusual bacterium which grew only inside of cells.
The flaw in dating websites' business model came into focus last week. They seek to make money out of loneliness and sexual frustration but their services threaten the existence of those very feelings. It's not the same as selling food or porn, which satisfied customers return to buy more of. If a dating website has any properly satisfied customers, it'll never hear from them again.
You may think that's unlikely to be a pressing problem. Perhaps you're of the view that internet dating is the last resort of the socially dysfunctional or irredeemably unattractive – that signing up for a dating website is just the final hopeless gesture you make before resigning yourself to dying alone. On a singleton's "to do" list, it's one place above "Bequeath all my money to a cats' home".
If so, you're railing against the tide of general chat. Everyone's saying how internet dating is the future – the technological solution to busy, modern disconnected urban life. "There's no shame in it," people declare – which obviously implies there's some shame in it or they wouldn't have brought up the concept of shame. Nobody ever bothered to point out that there's no shame in eating soup or going for a walk. But nevertheless, it could genuinely mean that there's now less shame in it (unless it's an S&M dating site, in which case, there's exactly the amount of shame that you're into). And, anecdotally, I've heard online dating can be a great way for professional men on the rebound to have one-off sex with women seeking long-term relationships.
Whatever your view of the efficacy of the phenomenon, many of the dating websites themselves seem to think that simply introducing the single to the single doesn't constitute a viable commercial plan. There have to be lies to entice people in. Monday's edition of Panorama exposed a number of ploys that sites have been using to prey on the horny and alone. For example there's "pseudo profiling", which a former employee of Global Personals explained thus: "We'd steal someone's identity through, say, MySpace or something. We'd take someone from a totally different country – Spain or wherever. We'd take the person's photos online and we'd start knocking out messages. It was all fake."
So, behind many online dating profiles, there's just a stranger dishonestly typing bullshit to attract the desperate. On top of that, the websites are generating pseudo profiles. How unfair of these companies to ensnare with their corporate lies lonely people who are quietly trying to lie each other into bed. Customers should be able to assume that the falsehoods they're reading contain at least a kernel of truth: their correspondents are sincerely looking for sex or company, and are willing to endure sex to get company, or endure company to get sex.
If I sound cynical about dating, it's because I've never really understood it. But then I was never introduced to it properly. At a formative age, nobody ever told me that it was something you were supposed to do if you fancied a girl: that you should invite her on some sort of pre-arranged social encounter and, in so doing, irretrievably and unilaterally betray your feelings. Obviously I'd seen dating depicted in films and stories – but the same could be said for dragons and talking badgers.
"How can two people who don't really know each other very well possibly spend all that time having dinner with a candle in between them, or walking round a museum, or even going to the theatre, which admittedly is mainly sitting in silence but with all sorts of intervals and snack- and programme-buying gaps, not to mention the drink afterwards, while in denial of a huge, mortifying subtext of mutual judgment?" I thought, not in exactly those words. I didn't really believe that, post the era of widespread ballroom dancing, such a formal and artificial way of piloting a relationship was what anyone actually did.
It's quite an odd concept to a shy teenager and so I think it warranted a full explanation. I wish someone had said to me: "Honestly, this genuinely happens. Ask her to the cinema or something. It won't necessarily work out, but posterity will judge your actions to have been perfectly reasonable." I might have had a go then. I was an obedient adolescent and underwent all sorts of odd and awkward situations – piano lessons, university interviews, French exchanges – because I was reliably informed it was part of the unavoidable ordeal of growing up.
But the only relationship advice I can remember being given was that I should "be myself" – a disastrous suggestion that, for many years, meant "silently infatuated". "Being myself" was never going to encompass saying: "There's a rather nice little Italian restaurant I've been meaning to try – perhaps I could pick you up at 7.30?" Just typing that has made me feel slightly sick, but there's no doubting the logic that, if you want someone to go out with you, asking them out is not an insane first step. But, like with algebra, the logic needs to be pointed out for all but the most gifted.
For my generation, a proper grounding in dating chutzpah, like the teaching of English grammar, had been removed from the curriculum. I'm not sure Michael Gove is the man to put that right. A lot of men my age went into the world thinking that the only way you got a girlfriend was to find a way of copping off with someone at a party. And the level of drunkenness often required by both individuals in order to make that happen can impair judgment of mutual compatibility. I'm not saying I approve of arranged marriage, but it sometimes works better than getting hammered, having a cry, drinking through it, throwing up and then returning to the party's chaotic closing minutes saying to yourself: "Right, who's left?" Which is why I usually stopped at the throwing-up stage.
Had online dating existed when I was growing up, it might have been harder for me to treat such interactions like the mythical unicorn. I might have learnt sooner about how to converse on random subjects with a subtext of wanting to be found attractive – or "flirtation", as I believe it's known by non-robots. I think that would have done me good, even if the person I was exchanging lies with was just an employee of the website. With dates, as with piano lessons, there's not much point turning up unless you've practised.
When the chairman of the Nationwide building society (whose name, like Geoffrey Howe's, is Geoffrey Howe) tried to justify its executives' pay to a restive AGM last week, he said several strange things. Here's one: "What would the Financial Services Authority say if our chief executive was paid just £100,000? It would shut us down. Nationwide would cease to exist."
Is that true? Is that the system? Does the Financial Services Authority reckon that anyone who gets paid £100k or less must be incompetent? That's a very cynical view to take of members of the House of Commons. But, if it is true, it certainly justifies Nationwide in keeping its chief executive Graham Beale's salary above that threshold. A full £2.16m above it, to be precise. That should make sure the FSA takes Nationwide seriously.
But the main thrust of Howe's argument was marginally less wacky: "This is a society problem, this isn't a Nationwide problem." Although, if it's a problem with society, it may well be nationwide. But not exclusive to Nationwide. He continued: "There is a huge mismatch between what pop stars earn, footballers earn, business people earn, bankers earn and what the man on the street earns. A lot of people just find it hard to understand why there is such a big differential between what the man in the street earns and what senior business people earn."
So the problem, according to Howe, is a lack of understanding. Well, the first thing to clear up is the distinction between the "man on the street" and the "man in the street". It's quite important. I don't think many people are complaining that bankers earn more than the homeless. This "society problem" can only be exacerbated by the fact that, from the plutocrat banker's vantage point, it seems, the income of someone begging on the street and that of the average passer-by are indistinguishably negligible. But I don't think that's the lack of understanding Geoffrey Howe was referring to.
It was deft of him to liken Nationwide's highly paid executives to pop stars and footballers. "Let's spread the hate," he was probably thinking. And, of course, the huge earnings of some professional sportsmen and musicians wind a lot of people up, particularly now times are hard. But being cross because some people earn more than you is different from failing to understand why. I reckon almost everyone gets why pop stars and footballers are often rich: millions of people are willing to pay significant amounts of money to watch them do their thing. It's very easy to see where that money comes from and, if you don't like Stoke City or Lady Gaga, you don't have to contribute yourself.
But, when it comes to financial services executives, I agree with Howe that this lack of understanding exists – but I don't agree that it's a problem. I think it's a good thing. I think it's the product of the wisdom of crowds. People don't understand why bank and building society executives are so highly paid simply because there is no adequate explanation. It's an anomaly which, practically speaking, could only be corrected by the very people who benefit from it. That is a key failing with the current financial system.
The Nationwide AGM was up in arms over these remuneration packages yet only 9% of the society's members failed to approve them. Either most Nationwide investors are secretly delighted to give millions of pounds to Graham Beale or that's not a functioning democracy. It's probably because most of the voters are failing to scrutinise how their money is spent. Or they don't much care. Nationwide made £475m profit last year. In that context, the £7.9m being handed out to five senior executives doesn't seem to matter so much.
Howe argues the standard case that Nationwide must pay the going rate for high flyers or it will cease to fly high. That makes a certain amount of sense but fails to explain how this going rate was arrived at, or to allay people's suspicions that it's become artificially inflated. What is it that Graham Beale does that someone else couldn't do – someone who'd be willing to take a pittance like £100k? Despite the evidence of Parliament and the early series of The Apprentice, it can't only be feckless attention-seekers who are willing to work for that kind of money.
When Beale moves on – probably to an even more highly paid job at a bank – his successor will be similarly highly paid. Is that because he (or she) (probably he) will be one of a tiny number of people who also have the "Beale touch", that magical ability to make an organisation hugely profitable? Or will they just be highly paid because people in jobs like that always are and they're not going to stop being if they can help it. On some level, is massively overpaying executives a necessary part of engendering confidence in the whole house of cards that we now know the financial sector to be? The idea that a cut-price chief executive might do just as well is too insulting to the industry's self-image to be permitted.
If that's what's going on then a sort of reverse market effect is in operation – where, like with designer labels, the exclusivity of costliness makes an executive seem desirable, capable, even brilliant. What a disaster for shareholders and building society members, as well as customers and social justice, if that's the case; if all of our financial institutions are being led in nude mediocrity by little emperors declaring: "If you want clothes like these, you've got to pay! Financial crisis, you say? Just think how much worse things would have been left to the kind of chump who will work for six figures."
It's a striking contrast to how MPs talk about their pay. Chastened by the expenses scandal, they jostle to express their revulsion at any talk of a raise. They don't tend to say: "If you don't pay top dollar, you won't get the best people." Perhaps that's because it's too obvious that we won't and so we haven't.
The Independent Parliamentary Standards Authority's proposed House of Commons pay rise would apparently cost Britain, a $2.3trn economy, £4.6m a year – and the prime minister (among many others) tells us it's too much. The Nationwide building society is paying nearly twice that to five managers, and its chairman is convinced that it's barely enough. My hunch is that they're both wrong.
